So, um, I am Bárbara, I'm a software developer at RStudio. Um, I am in the Shiny team and I'm
gonna talk today a little bit about Shiny, but mostly about databases. How do you interact
with databases from R in general and then specifically in Shiny because that brings a
whole new set of concerns. Uh, so to give you an idea of what I have planned for this talk, uh,
I kinda see it as having two parts. Uh, part one is mostly what, uh, we're gonna spend this
time on, uh, and it's gonna basically be about database- database best practices in R. In
particular, um, I'm gonna go through a set of packages that really help you when you're
interacting with databases in R and I'm gonna show how they build on top of each other. So
very quickly, DBI is a package that helps you standardise, uh, your interactions with a
database from R. ODBC is a really, uh, powerful, uh, DBI backend which will make sense when I
get to it. Um, dplyr, uh, is a pack- is probably the package that most of you know here. That's a
package that is really great for, um, wrangling and transforming data in a tidy way and it can
be used, uh, for database- for databases as well. So not only memory data but also remote
data. And lastly, uh, the pool package is actually the only package that I wrote from the ones
that I'm gonna talk about today and that's the one that relates most to Shiny. So pool helps
you to connect to a database from Shiny using all of these other packages. Um, so that's, uh,
my main goal for today, uh, but part two of the talk is, uh, I'm gonna try to spend a few
minutes on a Shiny app demo, uh, that I've created for this talk. It's a CRUD app so it means
that you can create, read, update, and delete data from a database all from within a Shiny app,
all from within R. In this case I chose a SQLite database, uh, which is local and really fast
and doesn't require internet. Um, so, um, part two is gonna take a lot less time than part one
because I, um, I hope that you will be motivated to look at the app if- if that's interesting to
you. Uh, and I just really wanna demo it quickly. Alright, so, databases. Um, at the risk of, uh,
oversimplifying you can think of databases as being, uh, in one of two categories. Uh, there's
relational databases and then there's the newer NoSQL or object oriented databases. We'll focus
on the first one, uh, and that's mostly for historical reasons. They've been, uh, around for
longer. Uh, the infrastructure around them in general, not just in R, is stronger. Uh, and very
quickly relational databases and their management systems store data in columns and rows. These
make up tables. It looks spreadsheet-y. Uh, they use SQL which is a language for querying data.
Uh, a few popular, uh, databases, uh, that are relational are, in this case open source, are
MySQL, Postgres, and SQLite. Recently for distributed systems you also have things like Apache
Hive and Cloudera Impala which are relational-like. Um, and most of these packages work really
well, uh, with relational databases. There's nothing stopping them from working with, um, the,
um, NoSQL databases. There- there needs to be more infrastructure there though and that we
haven't gotten to it yet. Uh, so I'm gonna skip over this a little bit and get right into the
packages. So the first foundational package, uh, that we're interested in when it comes to
databases in R is called DBI and it stands for database interface, uh, and the whole idea of DBI
is that it's a standard, it's an interface, uh, that defines how you should interact with the
database from R. So basically it has, um, S3 generics which are, uh, functions that are
implemented for particular types of connections. So DBI itself doesn't, uh, care what type of
connection you have, it just says that whatever is your connection you have to implement this
method for connecting, that method for disconnecting, and a bunch of other methods. So the
advantage of this is that you get, um, different databases using basically the same language and
that gives you a lot of portability in your code. You can basically migrate your database to
another system and be able to use, uh, a lot of your old code. Uh, so one thing that I wanna, uh,
note particularly is that, uh, as I said, DBI itself doesn't care what is the particular
database you're using. Uh, all of that work is done by other packages and these, uh, packages
will implement all of these methods for a particular database, uh, or a database
management system. So these are the so called DBI compliant backends, um, our SQLite, our
MySQL, our Postgres are all examples of DBI compliant packages, um, so you need to use both
of them if you want to connect to, uh, a SQLite database. Um, so and if this sounds like
extra work to you, again, the advantage is that by having DBI, um, you have a very portable, um,
language, uh, for a lot of different packages. In practice, uh, DBI looks like this. You can
create a connection by calling DB connect. In this case I am creating a, um, connection
to, uh, SQLite database in memory. Uh, you can write a table, you can get a query, this is SQL
right here, so it, you have to be a little bit fluent in SQL and when you're done you need to
disconnect your connection which is very important because if you forget to do this and you're
doing a lot of queries and creating a lot of connections you will actually leak a lot of
connections. So the gist of it's pretty simple. Uh, one thing that I want to note in DBI
before we move on is that it also provides really good, um, SQL injection prevention, uh,
functions. So, uh, SQL injection is when, um, users, third parties can, uh, go to your app or
go to your program and inject code that has basically malicious intent. So in this case even
though the string here is asking for a name a user can do this, uh, and, and if you're not
escaping this correctly this can cause your database to lose a whole table. So this has
been a problem ever since relational databases have existed, uh, and the whole point of here,
the punchline of this comic is that you need to sanitize your database input and DBI has a
lot of functions for that. So keep that in mind. That is important. So moving on to ODBC. I'm
going to spend very little time on this. Uh, ODBC, uh, is yet another, uh, standard, yet
another specification. Uh, so ODBC, uh, unlike DBI however is independent of operating
system, of programming language, and it really is just a standard API of how to interact
with databases. How this relates to R is that very recently, uh, we have the ODBC package,
ODBC now in lowercase, which is a DBI compliant backend. So what this means is that if you
have an ODBC driver for a package that has been written by whomever, uh, that is not in R
because ODBC is not language dependent, and then you have DBI and ODBC, you don't need to
write your own driver for whatever database you want to connect to if you already have the
ODBC driver. So that's the real power of this, uh, and it really augments the power of DBI by
extending it to so many other databases that didn't have specific drivers. Uh, in practice it
looks very similar to what we've seen already. You have DB connect, you have a series of, uh,
arguments. One thing to note is that since, um, you're always connecting with ODBC, these
arguments are actually the same always now. It's always, um, UID for example instead of user or
username or one of the thousand variants that you can have. Uh, and then you can, uh,
continue doing, uh, doing a very similar job disconnecting at the end. Dplyr. Um, so the
idea, now that you know about DBI and you can use DBI for so many things, the idea, uh, to
take it one level up is to not have to worry about SQL, um, and just use Dplyr syntax, use R
code to talk to a database, to extract data, to insert data, uh, to transform data. Uh, so
Dplyr extends and wraps a lot of DBI methods and you can do most of what you can do, what you
can do with DBI and SQL directly with Dplyr and R. Uh, there are a few things that you still
need DBI for because, um, Dplyr is not magic, uh, although it seems like it sometimes. Um, and
there has been actually a very recent revamp of Dplyr, uh, and the introduction of a new
package called Dbplyr, uh, so this is, uh, fresh off the presses. Um, the bottom line I think is
if you ha- if you're used to R and if you're used to the Dplyr verbs, like filter and mutate
and group by and summarize, it's a very good, uh, idea to go with Dplyr. It also does a bunch
of optimizations for you with SQL translation and lazy evaluation so you're never loading
data into R until you need it. Uh, so if Dplyr is good enough for you, it tends to be, uh, a
great idea to use it and I hope this slide makes it really clear why that's so. Um, as you can
see we have exactly the same standard for connection that we have with DBI, but now to
query it we are just using Dplyr, we're piping things, uh, it's very easy for us to read as
human beings, you have a connection, you ask for the table called city and then you ask for
the first two rows and that's it. It's very intuitive, there's no select asterisk from
city limit to, uh, that we had to deal with before. So, finally, pool. Uh, so after all these
packages why do we need another one? Um, the problem that pool, uh, tries to solve is how- what
is the best way to interact with the database from Shiny? So Shiny brings its own set of
constraints, uh, there- for every one session there's only a single R process and potentially
many users. Establishing connections to a remote database can take quite a while and they can
go down at any time because of network problems or, uh, a bunch of other things. Um, so you're
really in this conundrum that you don't want a fresh connection for every query that you make
for every user action because that would be so slow, but you also don't want one connection
per app because what if it breaks down? What if there's two users trying to make a query at the
same time? So the pool package, uh, is meant to solve this problem, uh, by creating a pool
of connections and it- so it fetches the connections from the remote, uh, server and then it
keeps them locally and you can check them out as you need and return them and it does this
kind of behind a curtain so you don't even notice. It's actually very similar to how DBI looks
except for the creating and the closing of the pool itself. So the idea is that it's kind of
like having one connection per query except that the connections now are local, uh, and are
recycled. So every time you're done with a connection it goes back to the pool and it can be
used again. Uh, so it gives you, uh, usually very good performance and it takes care of
connection management. So it is mainly- pool is mainly important for shiny apps, uh, because
of this whole interactive context I was talking about, but it can be used in any other context
without any problem. Uh, you might not need it necessarily, but it definitely doesn't hurt and
it also integrates seamlessly with both DBI and dplyr. We'll be, uh, on CRAN really soon, uh,
and to have an idea of what it looks like, as you can see we still have our connection, our
disconnection, our query. The query is exactly the same as it is with dplyr or DBI, uh, and the
only things really that change is that instead of, uh, calling dbconnect I'm calling dbpool and
instead of calling dbdisconnect I'm calling poolclose and this takes care of making all the
connections and all the disconnections that you might need. Uh, I have some resources here, I'm
not gonna go through them now because time is short, but, um, the link is available at the
desk or however they're distributing it and you can check them out, uh, later. So, very
quickly, um, the shiny app that I built, uh, that is a CRUD app, this is kind of what it
looks like. You can see there's a few, well maybe you cannot see, but there's a few
options. You can create a table, uh, you can, uh, I'm actually gonna just show it. I think
you're gonna see it better. Um, so, um, you can create a table, uh, you can create a table
and, uh, so, alright, so, sorry for the zoom, uh, the idea here is that there's an overview
page that shows you the tables you already have, um, in this case I already populated this
table with one, uh, this database with one table and you can see here, um, let's zoom in,
no. Okay, so you can see here that it's a very small table. I've got three rows, three columns
and it's kind of an inventory for those of you who can't read at the back. There's ID and then,
uh, an item and how many of those you have. So, it's kind of an inventory type thing. Uh, so,
you can create a new entry, um, so, gonna have four, um, you can create a new entry, um,
and once you create entry, you can see it's immediately reflected here, there's now four
rows, if you read, you'll see there's now a new row, you can update an entry, uh, so, in this
case if I wanna update the one I've just done because I've got some more watches in this
case, um, I can do that and again it's automatically reflected here. I can also delete rows,
uh, and do all of the sender things that you'd like to do with a cred app. So, this is all
possible, uh, using Shiny, uh, DBI, Dplyr and Poole. All the source codes available with
the repo where these slides live as well and I encourage you to look at it if you're
curious, um, it covers basically, it puts into practice basically everything I talked about
in here. So, thank you.
Applause.
We have time for one question. Yeah.
So, we sent the package earlier this month, so, in a couple of weeks, couple of weeks.
Couple of weeks, yeah, it's, I, so, what, Dplyr was just released a couple of weeks ago, uh,
and it changed a lot of things, so I was waiting for that to update pool, uh, and get it released
to CRAN without having to break compatibility, which would have happened. So, now that's done
and I've actually finished it for, for useR, uh, what I wanted to do, it'll be like one more
week for me to test things completely and then I'll, I'll submit it to CRAN.